So, we're talking a little bit about
what's called kind of higher order
observables.
Higher order observables are if you think
about higher order components in react or
name, your framework of choice,
it is simply a component that
renders another component.
And in most programming
everything is easy.
Until you get to the point
where you are when
you're like mapping over an array, fine.
I can do that, anyone can do that.
Iterate over an array.
What happens that array contains an array.
Well, now you've got to
recursively go into that array,
do everything in that array,
so on and so forth, right?
And so, you can either use recursion and,
for instance JavaScript.
These days, right,
has a built in like flat map.
The idea of like take this
multi dimensional array and
just make it one regular
array of all the values.
That is also super useful in terms
of working with observables.
Right, okay, they have clicked great but
that click like maybe what you
wanna map it into a promise.
Well, a promise in this case
will also become an observable.
So, now you've got an observable floating
down your observable stream, right?
What really, you don't want the observable
in that case you want the value, Mark?
>> Some of these operators be used to
implement an undo operation in case
an optimistic UI update should roll back.
>> I mean, you could right?
Like if you think about scan, you can
take care of all of the state, right.
There's also, you have the ability
to kind of replay in some cases.
I think with scan is probably
the best way to do it, right?
Because for a lot of these, we'll see the
ability to like switch between pieces, but
keeping track of that state and taking the
different events that kind of go through
and be able to manage all that will let
you kind of adjust that as you go along.
With most things,
everything is easy until you have
things that appear in other things.
So for instance,
this would be problematic.
Remember when we had that original delay
in the notification we slammed on a bunch
of times.
And yeah, we waited two seconds and
then we got all of them, right.
If you wanted to theoretically,
have a observable that then we'll use of,
to then delay it a certain
number of milliseconds.
Well, now you have an observable
in your observable.
And so, you'll get is when
you subscribe to example,
you're gonna get an observable cuz that's
what you return from your map, right?
Is that what you wanted, [LAUGH] yeah,
sometimes we don't get what we want we get
what JavaScript tells
us we get we like it.
So, that's what we'll get in this case and
like a more common example is the button
got clicked or here was a string, or
here was an array of things I want to
use from fetch to get observables.
Again, now I have a stream of
observables that have a stream.
What I really wanna do if I can take
two observables from the top level and
merge them together, I should be able to
take observables in my observables and
flatten them into the main observable like
the the sacred timeline, if you will.
And merge my timelines into the main
timeline in this case, and if you're
thinking I should be able to do that, good
news, good, you're thinking correctly.
So, one strategy for doing this
there's an operator called merge all.
So, merge all or basically take all of the
kind of child observables in your stream,
and merge them together just
like when we merge the first and
the second observables before, right?
Now, this is common enough that there's
also a fun helper called merge map.
You wanna take a lucky
guess what that does?
>> Merges maps together?
>> Yeah, it's like flat map, right?
It maps and
then it merges them all together.
So, a lot of times you will see that
happen way more frequently than you will
map and then merge.
You'll usually just merge map and
save yourself a whole,
I guess 9 characters or
10 characters of code.
Guess the comma, so 11 characters of code.
You can merge map and
you can do it all in one pass.
And a lot of the rules that we saw
before apply as well for concat,
so concat will do the same thing.
It will do what concat did previously,
you'll map over all these items.
There'll become nested observables,
plays with the first one,
then play through the second one, then
play through the third one, right or so
on and so forth, right?
It all depends like the unique
problem that you're trying to solve,
if you don't have opinions,
merge is your best choice.
You're like, whatever, someone admitted,
I wanna do with that value.
But there are times where
you want to coordinate and
orchestrate the different asynchronous
events and that's where concat and
two other fun ones are gonna show up.
So, the more useful ones even,
merge map super useful concat map,
sometimes useful, like when you need
it in particular, switch map and
exhaust map are like cousins of
the bounce and throttle, right.
And they kinda again work
the opposite of each other.
Switch map says, drop whatever you're
doing, something else has omitted.
I don't even care what
I was doing previously.
Forget it.
I don't wanna know anymore.
Right, I wanna do the new thing.
Exhaust map is a little more stressed out.
It's like, I'm very busy doing this thing,
not doing other things.
I'm done with this thing.
And then, if anything else is
there to be done, I will go do it.
The interesting part is, like very similar
to debounce and throttle switch map
will simply cancel, stop no more, it'll
move on to the new hotness every time,
exhaust map will just ignore
things until it's done, right?
When it's done that if
something else wants to emit,
it'll switch over to that one, but it
will finish what it has done previously.
Now, we've talked a little bit about
autocomplete along the way here.
So for instance, like, cool, maybe they
stopped typing for 300 milliseconds or
debounce time has fired.
We're ready to make another request.
I don't care.
You're halfway through an API request,
request is taking too long.
We're done.
They're no longer searching for that.
I don't wanna know when it comes back.
I'm uninterested, right,
we have new things we're searching for.
And when that request comes back, whether
it's before or after the other one,
right, if you have like a like
slow internet connection you like,
the first request might come
back after the second one.
You don't wanna update the UI for
the thing they're done searching for,
you wanna update the UI for
the thing they most recently searched for.
Exhaust map will be like,
we're loading things right now.
I know they're rage clicking that button.
We're loading things right now.
[LAUGH] We're doing it, right?
This is maybe for
data that's not gonna change too much.
You don't need to fire off
a bunch of different requests,
like this request will get
them the data they want.
Just don't fire off new requests
until this comes back and
then they wanna search again.
Fine, right?
This could be a field where it's like we
are loading the previous thing, cool.
There's just a few more that we
won't play with too much, but
I just wanna like make you
aware of their existence.
Remember, we saw a fork join before
it gave you the last value of all
the observables combined latest all
will simply as long as all of them
have emitted, it will wait until each and
every one of them emits.
Once they have all emitted you will
get an array of all the values, right?
So, if there's still one you're
waiting on you don't get anything.
But once everyone has done something
you'll get an array of all the things that
happened.
If you are impatient and
want this ASAP you can use a start with
to kind of kick off each one of them and
then you'll get an array each and
every time any of them admit, right.
So, this can be useful if
you're building a UI like, hey,
I'm making a pixel painter, right?
I wanna know where their mouse is.
I wanna know what color right these
are all things that can change, right?
Give me the latest of all of these things
depending on what we're doing, right?
And then,
combine latest with just a way to kind of,
I want to rely on this other observable,
give me the last one of that every time.
So, the question is if you use exhaust
map and things happen while you're doing
the first thing are those
things backed up into a queue?
They're completely ignored,
thay're dropped, right?
We don't like we're busy, we're not doing
those things afterwards they could rage
clicked to their heart's content, we're
not dealing with it, we're not doing it.
We're finishing what we did in this case
and we'll go ahead and when we're done,
we'll do the next thing, right?
Like if an autosave is in progress you
might wanna let that autosave go through
or maybe you wanna switch it to the new
one, a lot of this will depend on
the exact type of interaction
you're trying to develop.
But the idea is that you have these
options you have the option to kinda
finish what you started.
You have the option to drop what you're
doing and do the new thing or merge,
hey, I don't care like things happen
like they can start and stop that timer,
I'm unconcerned,
I don't really care in this case.